Concepts
========

Datomic is designed to be directly programmable using data that represents the
domain model, represented as Entities with Attributes and Values. The primary
interface to Datomic is data, not strings, DDL or DML.

An Entity is referred by a generated id or keyword. Attributes are simply
namespaced-keywords. A value can be scalar (String, Integer, etc.,), or a
reference to another Entity. This reference establishes a relationship between
two entities. Though analogous to the concept of a _foreign-key_, Datomic
reference is just the value of the referenced attribute.

Entities in Datomic are definied recursively, like lists in lisp.

## Architecture

### Peers

Peers handle queries and data storage.

Applications with Datomic code runs in Peer(s). They take care of queries,
caching, and hide the details of synchronizing updates from other peers.

Peers query and access data locally using a database value and cache data
extensively using LRU cache, representing a partial copy of all the facts. They
construct a value for a database at a particular moment in time.

Peers are independent and don’t affect each other. They write new facts by
asking the Transactor to add them to the Storage Service, get notified by the
Transactor about new facts, and add them to their caches.

Peers can partition the load into different peers by "type" of data/work. A
production setup, typically, involves dynamically sharding data across peers.

### Transactors

A Transactor is a standalone process that handles transactions and indexing with
_writes and retracts_. They are responsible for synchronizing data to Peers and
implementing ACID transactions. Implemented in a "single thread of execution",
with full serializabilty (isolation level: serialized), they write to a
write-ahead log for durability. Like a coordinator: all writes must go.

Typically, a transactor is deployed at the same location as peers, preferably
close to the storage service. Transactors can be 1-2, run in serial sync, not in
parallel. During hot failover the 2nd transactor takes over (in a few seconds
for pro); however queries continue to work.

Transactor owns the root index, and the indexes are global.

A Transactor alsp handles indexing. Indexes are generated so peers can use it.

Additional notes:

- Careful with error vs timeout
- Can you pass around the 't' (in a cookie)? (Find out)
- Opaque binary blobs
- memcache--no invalidation

## Facts

The data model in Datomic is based around atomic facts called datoms: a single,
flat, universal relation.

There is no other structural component to Datomic.

A datom is a 4-tuple consisting of:

    [entity attribute value transaction]

Any model in real or manufactured world can be represented in this 4-tuple.

For ex, a Person can be created as:

    [100 :person/firstName "Rich" 1000]

Note that entity and transaction here are arbitrary numbers (can be generated by Datomic).

A blog can be modeled as two facts:

    [200 :blog/title "on datomic" 1000]
    [200 :blog/entry "datomic will change the way you think of databases" 1000]

A registration page can save a web form as a set of facts:

     [100 :user.registration/name "clojure-addict" 1000]
     [200 :user.registration/email "hello@example.com" 1000]
     [300 :user.registration/address "1 mission street san francisco ca 94103" 1000]

And so on.

## Entities, Attributes & Values

A Datomic entity is simply a _Fact_ providing a lazy, associative view of all
the information that can be reached from its id.

Let' revisit our 4-tuple Fact:

    [entity attribute value transaction]

- entity: entity id (typically, an auto-generated id)
- attribute: Clojure keyword representing both the model (namespace :person) 
  and attribute name (firstName)
- value: any value
- transaction: tx id generated by datomic; used internally for time-based 
  queries

Note that entities are not a mapping layer between databases and application
code: they're a direct translation from information stored in the database to
application as raw data structures.

Entity references are bi-directional by default:

    [{:db/id #db/id[:db.part/user -1]
      :person/name "Bob"
      :person/spouse #db/id[:db.part/user -2]}
     {:db/id #db/id[:db.part/user -2]
      :person/name "Alice"
      :person/spouse #db/id[:db.part/user -1]}]

Entity attributes are accessed lazily as you request them. 

They aren't typed.

_Let's revisit_: Fact (datom) is entity-attribute-value-transaction. Therefore,
attribute/value pair and the transaction are associated with the entity, which
is a number. The transaction holds the time. We create a new entity when we
transact an attribute without specifying entity. We change the attribute (add,
"update") when we transact with the entity.

## Indentity

Datomic auto-generates entity ids and stores them as part of every datom. To
simplify application access, `:db/ident` provides a keyword-based lookup to
entities that can be used by apis querying through entity 'id'.

For ex the following record can be accessed via `:person/name` lookup, instead
of the generated id.

    {:db/id #db/id[:db.part/db]
     :db/ident :person/name}

Identities can also be used to implement enumerated tags.

    {:db/id #db/id[:db.part/db]
     :db/ident :label/type
     :db/doc "Enum, one of :label.type/distributor, :label.type/holding,
        :label.type/production, :label.type/originalProduction,
        :label.type/bootlegProduction, :label.type/reissueProduction, or
        :label.type/publisher."}

`Unique identities` allow attributes to have unique values.

    {:db/id #db/id[:db.part/db]
     :db/ident :person/email
     :db/unique :db.unique/identity}

A unique identity attribute is always indexed by value.

`Lookup Refs' are _Business Keys_ on steroids: a list containing an attribute
and value.

    [:person/email "joe@example.com"]

To refer to existing entities in a transaction, avoiding extra lookup code, use:

    {:db/id [:person/email "rich@example.com"]
     :person/name :rich}

Note that Lookup refs _cannot_ be used in queries.

`Squuids` provide efficient, globally unique identifiers. They are _not_ real
UUIDs, but they come close as semi-sequential uuids. As long you don't generate
thousands of squuids every millisecond, indexes based on squuids will not
fragment: the first part of a squuid is based on the system time.

`ident` is designed to be fast. 

In general, queries against a single database can lookup entity ids via other
kinds of identifiers, but for efficiency should join by entity id.
